welcome to newsletter number 15. it's
been a little longer than usual between
newsletters i took some time away from
it to focus on other reading and
reflecting as i say for various things
on my youtube channel podcast and other
projects in personal news my parents
50th wedding anniversary approaches in a
couple of months and so i am organizing
the deserved celebration for that
deserved i say as if any statistic is
broadly known to people it is the
unfortunate statistics on long-term
relationships so a party is called for
and in the planning
that personal news aside professional
projects continue a pace alongside and i
am back to this part of my content
creation on substack and today my theme
is hyperbole exaggeration in some cases
perhaps outright lies or
misrepresentation
but let me be polite about all the
examples i'm going to use today and just
say that the thread connecting them is
they are all a species of over-the-top
hype of some kind or other let's begin
in physics and with quantum computation
i mentioned this in a recent live stream
which you can find on my usual youtube
channel now that's two hours and 20
minutes of me rambling on camera in
response to questions from patreon
supporters of mine i can't recall
exactly why it came up exactly but i did
mention a certain article linked to in
the substance newsletter and well the
article is what you get in the title the
title of the article is scientists just
debunked google's quantum advantage
claim using a normal supercomputer some
background first before i get to the
article itself
we have known quantum computers are
possible ever since 1985 or so when
david deutsch first proposed the theory
of their operation
ever since we have been in roughly the
same position as we were when alan
turing first created the theory of
classical computation which was in 1936
and some years later when the first
working versions of classical electronic
computers were created now the story of
the history of computing is not exactly
a straight line of theory through to
practice or planning through to
implementation by some accounts in about
1833 charles babbage had a calculator of
sorts a mechanical device that could do
a lot with numbers and he had in the
works a device the analytical engine
which in around 1837 he had the plans
that once again although it was a
mechanical rather than electrical device
it could
in theory with some clever use of
punched cards it could have could have
mined you if it had been built it could
have been what we call turing complete
in other words it would have been
capable of calculating or computing
anything that any other device capable
of computing could have so long as you
had enough punched cards and time to
wind the thing up
one of the first actual electronic
computers was of course commissioned by
the british military the british
military intelligence services as far as
i understand during the second world war
to crack the nazi code machine enigma
that device was called bomb pronounced
bomb if i understand the phonetic
spelling correctly now the bomb was an
electromechanical device which means
you're getting the speed up possible
using electricity and soon after that
followed famously things like the z3
which in 1941 was the first fully
automated turing complete digital
electromechanical computer and less than
a year later they came the atana sloth
berry computer the abc which was no
longer mechanical at all fully
electrical with vacuum tubes and then
colossus not turing complete until in
1945 the us army built eniac the turing
complete fully digital electronic
computer with thermionic valves vacuum
tubes
okay so we're not quite there yet with
quantum computers our alan turing david
deutsch has shown there in theory
possible so what do we say if the laws
of physics permit it it can be done
given the right knowledge but we don't
have that yet the engineering
difficulties it would seem are rather
steeper than with classical computers
but when we have a fully universal fully
capable quantum computer it will be a
game changer and we should expect things
to change pretty swiftly after that
there are lots of problems that could
use the inherent speed up in processing
power we would get from even even a
modest quantum computer of a few hundred
bits i can well imagine as a very
amateur gamer that i am that a computer
of some minimum number of qubits would
be able to run simulated worlds of super
high fidelity and realism and web 3 type
stuff in ways we can only dream of now
think super sharp beyond photo realism
and frame rate so fast no one will even
bother quoting them anymore in virtual
worlds of stupendous complexity and near
infinite size where one could go up to a
virtual tree and pick up its fallen
virtual leaves and take out a virtual
microscope and inspect it for virtual
microscopic creatures whose cells you
could even see of course the hard part
there might be someone would need to
program all of that and write the code
for it but actually it already seems as
though we're getting to natural language
programming languages and so forth where
well you could just feed it exactly that
set of instructions i kind of already
gave
build a forest of eucalyptus trees
populate its trees with a dozen
different species of microscopic bugs
make sure the bugs are made of cells
that when inspected look and behave like
real cells presumably someone has
already written the program for real
cells which just gets called i'm
guessing in the future virtual worlds
will be virtually constructed either
like that or the way we now construct
web pages
few people need to know html the
language behind a lot of web pages to
build a web page anymore the bottleneck
is just creativity and imagination and
style that kind of thing not
learning a particular computing language
or even really learning how to use a
particular bit of software but we
digress the potential of quantum
computation is there and people are
racing to build quantum computers
including as i have mentioned on topcast
the us army again which seems to have
this long tradition of working on the
fundamentals of engineering
supercomputers not least because they're
into defending the country from cyber
attacks these days as well as
code breaking and so on the us army
actually sponsors the university of new
south wales center for quantum
computation in part this is the one
place i follow reasonably closely as an
outsider lay person because it's local
to me and it's my old alma mater and i
have met some of the key researchers
there and i think they're doing great
work follow their progress at the link i
provide in the substance newsletter or
just google university of new south
wales unsw center for quantum
computation now the thing is that they
are more or less as far as i can tell a
fully public-facing organization they're
not pretending to have secret technology
out the back somewhere or other well
maybe they might be keeping some things
hidden in commercial confidence but it's
not a fully functional universal quantum
computer they're not telling us about
but you can get a hint at the state of
the art of quantum computing by reading
their material it's all on their website
and it's not like well they're over
there in academia and so cannot hope to
do what industry is actually doing
because of a lack of funding oh no the
university of new south wales center of
excellence in quantum computation there
they're backed not only by one of the
largest research universities in
australia the university of new south
wales but also a whole bunch of other
research universities just as big all
across australia and also by top-notch
international universities coming
together to help them including
cambridge oxford places in germany and
france the u.s singapore and indeed the
federal government of australia give
some funding the u.s military gives them
funding there are industry partners
including nasa and some big banks and
telecommunications companies and even
google so if anyone's going to make
breakthroughs in this area it's going to
be those guys because it's not for lack
of funding they're they're at the
forefront they are at the cutting edge
of this stuff and they're putting their
research out there for everyone to check
now the u.s military involvement is not
telegraphed on their website it could in
fact be a bit of a secret but i was
never told when i was told they were
involved that it was a secret so unless
camouflage troops or men in black come
to my door i don't think i'm speaking
out of turn here i'll tell the story of
how i learned about the us army being
involved i've told it before actually on
topcast in my multiverse series when i
mentioned quantum computation there so
i've been out to the university of new
south wales a couple of times to their
center of quantum computation had a look
around at their facilities and as i say
i've met some of the researchers and got
to kind of interrogate them to the
limits of my own superficial knowledge
about all this and that's not much at
all perhaps a little bit more than a lay
person but nowhere near an expert well
anyways it's obvious that what they do
is they cool everything down to very
close to absolute zero so that the
things they are using to serve as qubits
can remain in the entangled state which
is to say acting as a single system of a
kind
what they do is they have doped silicon
which just means silicon with bits of
phosphorus in it this can be used when
cooled as a quantum processor of a kind
two different phosphorus atoms act as
the one thing when they become entangled
and can do the task of quantum
computation by simultaneously computing
stuff and then combining the results at
the end to give it the output now that's
a terribly hand wavy way of explaining
what's going on and i'm not even going
to try to give a specific example of how
any of this works there are wonderful
youtube videos out there
just search for the university of new
south wales center for quantum
computation on youtube
i link to one with derek mueller who i
say is the world's best physics
communicator we have right now and he's
there interviewing people from the
university of new south wales about
their research so there's some really
good stuff there on youtube about
the model of quantum computation the
physical hardware stuff that the
university of new south wales is engaged
in trying to build anyways the thing
about what they are doing some of what
they are doing in fact they're doing a
lot both on the hardware and the
software side of things is to try and
get that physical stuff the quantum
processor to at least show proof of
concept and they've done this but it
needs to be scaled up so that it
outperforms every other computer on the
planet they haven't been able to
entangle many qubits at this stage they
kind of only have a few a couple i think
maybe four three i don't know anyway
once they've done that once they've
managed to scale it up so it's better
than all the other computers then we'll
know we're on to something so their
model is this phosphorus atom pair in
silicon
that's their idea but to keep the atoms
entangled they need to cool everything
supercool everything because if those
atoms start vibrating in the wrong way
well then we get
so called decoherence a loss of
information which is in that quantum
system to the rest of the environment so
it's got to be cold
colder than anywhere in the universe
well below the temperature between let's
say galaxies so eventually when i was
being given the tour and the talk and
all that kind of thing i got to asking
them how do they do this and they said
liquid helium but and here's the thing
regular liquid helium cold as it is you
know minus 270 or something like that is
not cold enough so they use this clever
technique of evaporative cooling and
evaporative cooling is well just what it
sounds like it's the principle of
perspiration get a little sweat on your
forehead and the breeze evaporates it
away cooling you down because the
evaporated water needed to be heated to
evaporate and that takes energy so the
energy is taken from your forehead by
the water as it turns into gas the
overall effect you feel cooler and the
surroundings get a little warmer so what
happens with this quantum computation
device is they take regular helium which
is helium-4 it's got two protons and two
neutrons hence the four it's got those
particles in the nucleus and then they
mix in with this helium this liquid
helium a higher than normal ratio of
helium-3 so they've got a solution of
helium-4 and helium-3 helium-3 has only
got one neutron so it's lighter and
because it's lighter it evaporates more
rapidly away from the helium-4 so it
will effectively evaporate away from
that mixture the solution of helium-4
and helium-3 and it'll take with it
energy that energy just taken away is
observed as a further cooling of the
helium-4 bath
helium won't solidify so it just gets
colder and colder and colder as a liquid
which is convenient for what they want
to do
so i ask them where do you get this
helium-3 from is it like some process of
distillation with regular helium and
their answer is no that's not the way
they do it the best way to get it the
cheapest way is from nuclear weapons of
a certain kind decommissioned nuclear
bombs ones that are not going to ever be
used they're stored in america somewhere
other and of course
they're radioactive and part of the
radioactive decay
part of the radioactive decay products
is helium-3 gas and it's the us army's
task to keep those bombs secure wherever
they happen to do this and well why let
that helium-3 go to waste if someone can
use it so they collect it and sell it to
people or in this case give it to the
university of new south wales as far as
i'm aware perhaps for a discount in
exchange for
well whatever the contents of their
research into quantum computation is so
the university of new south wales i am
told i am led to believe receives
balloons of helium-3 gas from the us
army for this purpose
at least this is what i was told it may
be wrong things might have changed but
it's kind of a cool story if it is true
now because i do kind of keep one eye
sometimes on this center for quantum
computation in here in australia and
their press releases i have a sense of
the state of the art
their way of doing things is not the
only way i grant that but they freely
admit they still feel a long way from
having developed anything like a desktop
version of quantum computers or
something that can outperform even a
modest classical computer so when
someone does elsewhere come along to
make claims that our quantum computer
can outperform other computers on the
planet it's a remarkable claim by that
measure that the
freely available stuff from researchers
engaged in this area are saying we can't
do this we're nowhere near this and then
some other people
usually in industry are saying things
like we've got this black box and inside
the black box we say is a quantum
computer and it can outperform all the
other regular computers
well
that's when your skepticism has to be
exceedingly high how are they doing it
of course they don't usually tell you
how they're doing it they're saying well
that's commercial in confidence that's
copyright this kind of claim has been
made many times over the years on
investigation it often eventually turns
out well it's not an actual quantum
computer after all or if it is a quantum
computer they're not claiming it's
universal or if they are claiming it's
universal they're not claiming it can
beat any other computer at all other
kinds of casts just this one particular
kind of calculation they can do better
than other computers can do something
like that so there's a lot of hype a lot
of hyperbole reading the article about
one kind of hyperbole recently
gives a sense of what's going on let me
go to the article that's titled
scientists dethrone google's quantum
advantage claim with a conventional
computer published in singularityhub
which is an online magazine written by a
fellow called ed gent and published on
august the 12th of this year 2022 and it
begins
when google announced its quantum
computer had solved a problem beyond the
capability of the most powerful
supercomputer it was a landmark for the
industry but chinese researchers have
now shown they could solve the same
problem on a normal supercomputer in
just seconds
the ultimate promise of quantum
computing is its ability to carry out
certain computational feats far faster
than classical machines or even solve
problems that would be essentially
impossible to crack using traditional
approaches the field is still nascent
though and today's devices are far too
small to be put to work on any real
world challenges but in an effort to
prove that the field is making progress
developers of quantum processors have
been eager to find problems that may not
have much practical use but can
demonstrate the potential speed ups
their technology is capable of google
made a major breakthrough on this front
in 2019 when it claimed that its
sycamore processor had solved a problem
that would take a supercomputer 10 000
years in just 200 seconds
the problem was rigged in their favor as
it essentially involves simulating their
processes output but by showing that a
classical computer would struggle they
were able to claim quantum supremacy
more commonly known as quantum advantage
today end quote i'll just pause that so
this idea of quantum supremacy is the
this weird claim that
the
your system can do something better than
any other existing system which is
hard to prove and the reason it's hard
to prove or hard to demonstrate really
is because you don't know that tomorrow
there's not going to be a another
classical computer built with better
processes and better algorithms that
it's going to be able to beat your
computer unless you can show that your
computer really is a genuine quantum
computer which in these cases like
google you go to the details and when
it's just a company building these
things they've hidden it away they've
hidden the details away kind of like
pharmaceutical companies and i was
saying in my live stream about this this
is one of the great tensions between
scientific research which should be
open-ended and people are kind of
sharing all their ideas and
the commercial interests of industry
where people want to keep their ideas
secret for copyright reasons and quite
right too so you've got this difficulty
if only everyone was sharing all of
their research and information together
then progress would happen faster but
then again there wouldn't be as much
money involved and so no one would be as
interested in getting into that industry
because there would be no money to be
made
this is the difficulty so where we are
is in this strange place where
you have organizations like the
university of new south wales freely
publishing all of their material and
saying look this is the progress we've
made and it is very modest they are
making progress but it is very very very
very modest because they're nowhere near
being able to outperform normal desktop
computers let's say and yet you have
these organizations who well they want
investors don't they and they're very
ready to say ha we've got the thing
we've already got the thing that is
outperforming every classical computer
on the planet
and we have to be skeptical if i was an
investor i'd be very very skeptical
about any company at this point who is
making these kinds of claims
that if i was an investor i'd be looking
for an organization who's doing the
research in a very public way like the
university of new south wales now i've
got no interest in the university of new
south wales apart from the fact i was
once a student there but it's that kind
of thing here we are publishing all of
our stuff on our website and and through
the usual academic journals and we're
we're engaging in
public outreach to explain what we're
doing that compared to
this organization or that organization
or that company just
not actually publishing very much at all
keeping it very close to their chest and
just now and again
releasing a media release
that hypes up what they can do
misleading in some ways let's keep going
with
this particular article so that i've
just said how
this google
so-called quantum computer this
so-called sycamore processor
google claimed
they had
managed to perform a computation in just
200 seconds that would have taken some
other supercomputer 10 000 years
and that's called quantum supremacy
moving on they the article says quote
but now researchers in china have
cracked the same problem in just 15
hours using some clever algorithmic
design and a moderately large computer
according to their calculations it would
only take a few dozen seconds if they
had access to full-size supercomputers
the challenge google had set was to
simulate its processor acting more or
less as a random number generator the
only difference was that they repeated
the algorithm millions of times and due
to the nature of the algorithm a certain
pattern should emerge in the random
numbers being spat out simulating this
on a classical computer should quickly
get difficult as the size of the process
increases because the amount of
information encoded increases
exponentially with each extra qubit
using conventional approaches to solve
this problem google predicted it would
take 10 000 years to simulate its 53
cubit processor end quote okay so
they're saying they've got a 53 qubit
processor
my understanding at the university of
new south wales is perhaps they've got a
four qubit processor now google doesn't
release its plans
it doesn't tell you exactly
what the architecture is you know tell
us what their physical plans are tell us
what they don't okay they're they're a
company they want to keep it themselves
they might not be lying they might not
be engaged in hyperbole but if all we've
got to go on is stuff like this
where they're saying they've been mad
they've managed to do this calculation
and here's the result of doing this
calculation then some other group comes
along and says well no we can do it much
faster than what you claimed a classical
computer would be able to do this in
fact we can show mathematically that if
only we had access to an even bigger
supercomputer we could do it faster than
you can so
that seems a little dubious doesn't it
let's keep going quote the team from the
institute of theoretical physics at the
chinese academy of sciences got around
this by reworking the underlying
mathematics
used to solve the problem they
represented the processor as a 3d
network of mathematical objects called
tensors that represent the logic gates
between the 53 qubits this network was
repeated over 20 layers designed to
represent the 20 cycles the quantum
algorithm runs through before the
processor's output is red the advantage
of using tensors is that
gpus the chips that have powered the
deep learning revolution are able to
process them very quickly in parallel
the researchers also took advantage of
the fact that google's computations on
sycamore were not very precise achieving
a fidelity of just 0.2 percent this
allowed them to sacrifice some of the
accuracy of their simulation to boost
its speed which they did by removing
some of the connections between qubits
end quote this is another issue with
quantum computation that sometimes isn't
talked about and that is that the error
correcting in quantum computers is of a
different species to what's going on in
regular digital classical computers
that the output you get the the result
of doing your calculation using a
quantum computer
comes with a rather large error bar in
many many cases
they're saying there that the sycamore
processor this 53 qubit thing is only
achieving an accuracy or a fidelity of
0.2 percent that seems
well that seems more believable doesn't
it you know when you're quoting really
really low numbers like that then i
believe you i believe that you're not
being very successful
it's when they say they're being
exceedingly successful way more
successful than anyone else that then i
sort of my ears pick up and think
really okay let's keep on going and it
says the article says quote the result
was that they managed to simulate the
output of the sycamore processor to a
fidelity of 0.37 in just 15 hours on 512
gpus considerably less processing power
than most leading supercomputers a paper
outlining the results is currently
impressed at physical review letters but
a non-peer-reviewed pre-print was
released last november and all these
links are in the original article which
is linked to in my substance newsletter
while the result does somewhat burst
google's quantum supremacy bubble in an
email to science the company pointed out
that it had predicted classical
algorithms would improve in its 2019
paper but they add that they don't think
they'll be able to keep pace with the
exponential increases in performance of
quantum computers for long
it's not the only quantum supremacy
experiment to be undone in 2020 a
chinese team claimed that a problem
their quantum computer could solve in
200 seconds would take a supercomputer
2.5 billion years but in january
researchers showed it would actually
only take 73 days
that's quite a difference isn't it
okay just reading the end of this
article
quote while this doesn't negate the
progress being made in the field a
growing chorus of researchers say
pitting quantum and classical machines
against each other on these kinds of
abstract computational problems doesn't
really give a clear sense of where the
technology is at the real test they say
will be when quantum computers are able
to solve real world problems faster and
more efficiently than classical ones and
that seems like it may still be some way
off and quite great perfect i love the
way that article ends yes so they have
these esoteric mathematical
uh
computations they're doing using these
algorithms the algorithms could be
improved algorithms are just a kind of
software and so it takes smart people to
come up with better and better
algorithms as to whether or not they're
quantum algorithms or not is another
matter but the issue is exactly as they
say at the end there
the real world test is solving
real-world problems not strange abstract
problems that people have difficulty
understanding okay so
that's hyperbole in technology
and it's an interesting clear-cut case
of where companies are coming out and
spruking their wares saying how
wonderful these things are only for it
to all turn out to be
exceeded in power by your regular
desktop computer let's move on to a
different kind of hyperbole hyperbole in
politics nobody can do it like me nobody
nobody can do it like me honestly
nobody's stronger than me nobody has
better toys than i do there's nobody
bigger or better at the military than i
am nobody loves the bible more than i do
nobody builds walls better than me
nobody's better
to people with disabilities than me
nobody's fighting for the veterans like
i'm fighting for the veterans there's
nobody that's done so much for equality
as i have there's nobody more pro-israel
than i am there's nobody more
conservative than me there is nobody
that respects women more than i do
nobody would be tougher on isis
than donald trump because nobody's ever
had crowds like trump has had there's
nobody that understands
[Music]
the horror
of nuclear better than me but nobody
even understands it but me it's called
devaluation the sale of the uranium that
nobody knows what it means i know what
it means nobody knows more about trade
than me nobody knows the game better
than i do but in the history of
this country has ever known so much
about infrastructure as donald trump i
know the h-1b i know the h-2b nobody
knows it better than me nobody knows
politicians better than i do nobody
knows more about taxes than i do nobody
knows more about debt than i do nobody
knows the system better than me
so that's trump
trump being hyperbolic it's ridiculous
the commander-in-chief of hyperbole now
history as well as the very present
tells us of some dangerous leaders
and i am not just seeing that in trump
to the same degree there's a lot of
hyperbole around trump trump himself
speaks hyperbolically and the talk
around trump is hyperbolic his
supporters are hyperbolic in their
support of him which is a worry and his
detractors are hyperbolic in their
absolute disdain for the man
now
certainly he's worse than some leaders
we've had he's absolutely worse than
some leaders we could have
but not so much worse
i share the view that someone like biden
for example
who does indeed seem
cognitively impaired at times he could
be a danger then it could be a danger
insofar as well the bureaucratic
apparatus are just able to cajole and
coerce him in such a way he's perhaps
not wielding the actual power of the
presidency because he's just not all
there but i don't know that's just the
appearance that he appears to give off
in the media now trump might be at the
other extreme maybe he just ignores all
the expert bureaucratic advice
some would see that as a vice
some would see it as a virtue but
we do not know seemingly what exactly if
anything
he did during his time in power that was
just so egregious and beyond the pale
but some people are saying that he was
and is especially bad
so we've had some recent examples like
this
i mean a hunter bind at that point
hunter bind literally could have had had
the corpses of children in his basement
i would not have cared right it's like
it's there's nothing first of all it's
hunter biden right it's not it's like
it's not joe biden but
even if joe like even whatever scope of
joe biden's corruption is like if you if
we could just go down that rabbit hole
endlessly and and
understand that he's getting kickbacks
from hunter biden's deals in ukraine or
whatever else right or china
it is
infinitesimal
compared to the corruption we know trump
is involved in and so
that's hyperbolic unfortunately i think
sam there is being a little over the top
it's it's an example of hyperbole so
he's exaggerating i know for a fact sam
does not literally think that he knows
what literally means the man's
compassionate and particularly motivated
by the suffering of children so he would
admit that what he said there was over
the top he would care about the corpses
of children of course he would he's
making a hyperbolic point to try and get
a point across but this is my theme here
hyperbole the use of hyperbole in public
discourse but then now today
the reaction to sam's comments has been
hyperbolic as well and so i seriously
considered when i was writing this up
today
just deleting this entire section of my
sub stack this section of the newsletter
because i don't want to add to the
over-the-top reaction so i'm not going
to be over the top i'm not going to be
superlative about it i'm not saying sam
is dangerous or anything like that i am
however saying those words were
hyperbolic and the rhetoric of trump
himself should be toned down he's always
hyperbolic always exaggerating and so
too should the rhetoric in response to
trump b it's the age of hyperbole it's
as if there are little spot fires that
flare up in our discourse now and again
and rather too many of us are carrying
around the equivalent of either massive
magnifying glasses or parabolic mirrors
now the spot fires themselves might be a
problem no doubt a problem and in our
papillion framework almost any activity
in life we can engage in represents
engaging with some problem or other
but
some of these problems some of them are
like spot fires irritations that if left
unchecked could indeed get out of
control but what you do in these
situations is hopefully provide some
solution
the equivalent of water or the
extinguisher instead we have these
megaphones which are people with lots of
reach who really are like the parabolic
mirrors and lenses who can take the
energy of that spot fire and focus it
into something really incendiary really
dangerous they're not helping to stamp
it out they're not helping to take the
temperature down they're using it in
some way to direct whatever it is the
energy of whatever that problem is
onto their political enemies
we need to be more serious i can
absolutely agree trump is not an ideal
candidate he's not ideal
that is true and many would say it
undersells things many would say he's
unfit for office but i don't buy that
the very institution that allows someone
to run and win is simultaneously the
same one that restricts his ability to
do much damage
it the system says who is fit and let's
face it he didn't do much damage people
say he did damage the institution but
again i don't see that the institution
of
the election of the voting system of the
presidency removed him when no people
didn't want him anymore what exactly did
he do while in office that was so
reprehensible did he start more wars did
he literally send police to the doors of
his political opponents did he
seek to cancel welfare someone who has
done a good job more or less of simply
presenting what was said for example in
the trigonometry interview with sam and
also comparing what sam said or claimed
or insinuated as many do that trump was
a law breaker and so on and actually
what is known which is to say what we've
got explanations of is a fellow called
mike on youtube now i don't know mike
aside from stumbling across his very
small youtube channel it's it's a bigger
youtube channel than mine but you know
it's still well below 15 000 subscribers
as of today
what mike does is rather like what libs
of tick tock does on twitter well maybe
he does a little more libs of tick tock
does nothing more than simply repost
what some people on tick tick-tock have
made in terms of videos and recordings
of their own ideas they are over there
the people on tik-tok creating content
speaking into a microphone and camera
and giving us their life philosophies
and ideologies
and libs of tick tock does nothing more
than curate these videos and post them
to twitter but for that that account
that twitter account gets accused of
well bias or prejudice or something like
that which is bizarre these people on
twitter who make certain claims and
these people on tick-tock who make
certain claims let's face it claims
about biology rather a lot of the time
things like biological males can give
birth or in some cases which is more
worrying
young biological males who might be a
little bit confused or uncertain or
afraid or whatever you want to call it
should have this confusion uncertainty
and fear
treated via a surgical procedure namely
they should be physically altered with
expensive risky surgery because well in
some cases it would appear their parents
are applying some degree of
psychological pressure coercion in the
form of a political ideology and there
seems to be virtuous in actually doing
this now it is true that strictly
scientifically speaking there do exist
people born male who in the extreme
might one day go on to give birth but
this does not mean that the claim
biological males can give birth is some
sort of scientific claim it's rather
like you have cases where a dog is
unfortunately born with three legs you
don't then conclude on that basis well
this edge case proves that dogs have
three legs no
dogs have four legs that's it now it is
possible that a dog can have three legs
or two or one or none or five yes but
dogs have four legs and then dogs like
any other living thing can have
variation due to mutation or something
else so too with people but with people
there's even greater variety still but
this does not change the fact
mothers give birth
fathers do not that's that
but there is an ideology out there that
would have it that every child simply
comes to believe there should be no
difference between mothers and fathers
and that the words are interchangeable
and so too is male and female as if the
last few millennia of learning on this
topic has been refuted in the last five
years or so of what amounts to a kind of
minor but still mass political hysteria
we should help children not confuse them
children live not merely in a culture
but in a world and though you might
think that now in your city it is quite
normal for women to be men and
men to be women
and this should be celebrated
teaching a child that now and sending
them into a world far broader than your
narrow somewhat misconceived i would say
political doctrine of the moment is a
kind of psychological abuse it means
that the child will eventually encounter
reality in ways that will be extra
uncomfortable for reasons that did not
need to exist
there is already enough uncomfortable
confusion out there for young people to
navigate denying reality just makes this
worse and the reality is males have xy
chromosomes have penises testis and
produce sperm women have xx chromosomes
vaginas ovaries and produce over that's
that that's the truth learn that first
and then at some later point if it ever
comes up learn the exceptions the rare
exceptions they're not the rule we don't
begin begin with the exceptions and then
try and get a rule out of that no we say
this is a dog what's a dog well it's an
animal how many legs does the dog have
mommy well that's great you asked and
i'm so proud of you for asking that
question a dog can have any number of
legs at all and ears
any number of years some dogs make
noises like birds and some like cats and
a dog is a kind of well a thing that can
be anything you want it to be and mommy
what's a man a man is anything you
wanted to be this way of talking does
not help
it's not affirming it's confusing it's
wrong it's relativism it's denying what
we understand about reality so that
might all be a little bit off track so
let me go back to mike and his youtube
channel which is called mike versus
everyone and mike curates just like libs
of tick tock does some examples of
rather bizarre contemporary ideas and my
business is looking at interesting ideas
and trying to analyze them in some way
now people have always had bizarre ideas
some are good and some help us make
progress i think it's important people
be creative and experiment with
difference and i think this is part of
the explanation about what's going on
with all of this stuff involving gender
but there comes a time for creativity to
encounter criticism and if you are
putting your stuff out there on places
like tick tock you have to expect
criticism the encounter with reality
both social and physical and this is
important actually for children of today
to understand you live in a world of
content creation a world of ideas that's
online and where you produce
record
and say stuff yes where you express your
ideas you should do that all online but
perhaps once you have carefully
considered and criticize those ideas
first internally only then should you
start publishing them out there first
you should start talking about those
ideas with people you care about and get
some feedback before you start
publishing stuff
without doing this well you might end up
on something like libs of tick tock or
perhaps mike's channel and especially
teachers are doing this young teachers
especially trying to say they're on side
with all of the students that they teach
rather than providing feedback from
reality telling them something about the
truth that's the caring thing the caring
thing if you're a teacher is to yes
encourage yes foster creativity but also
to help be a guide to help explain what
reality is as well
it's not being abusive to just say well
here's the fact of the matter there's
nothing wrong with that but people get
upset when you know some of these
teachers and some of these young people
who freely put up their stuff willingly
on places like tick tock
then get promoted then their video blows
up so to speak it goes viral well i
would say there's no point complaining
you did after all create this content in
the first place so it would be viewed
right
so now you have people watching it and
commenting on it after you've taken the
time presumably
to plan it record it upload it and
promote it so it's on you now that your
video is out there for criticism it's on
me if anything of mine happens to get
criticized and it does and young people
in the world need to understand that
that's the world they're living in
that's my defense of things like libs of
tik tok and channels like mike's go to
the sub stack newsletter for a link to
my channel mike essentially just curates
the videos and reacts you know his
reactions are laughing sometimes eye
rolls little comments and even some
analysis i don't always agree with his
analysis that's okay in his reaction to
sam harris on trigonometry
given i have been a fan of sam's for
years now ever since actually the
publication of the interfaith which
takes us all the way back to 2004.
because i've been a fan of sam's for so
long i might not have gone as strong as
mike has in his criticism but mike says
he wasn't really aware of sam harris
before so he's kind of hearing the way
he's speaking
for the first time and so it must be
jarring
some half of the united states of
america or so support trump or supported
trump okay so maybe it's less let's call
it 40
but that's 40 percent of what 330
million people now say only half of them
vote so
it's usually actually considerably more
than that but let's say it's half of the
that's 20 so we've got 20 percent of
people at least in the united states who
we can say support trump i'm being super
conservative now so that's 20 of 330
million people that's still 60 million
people 60
million
people
and they seem to passionately support
him as well
and mike is one of those 60 million
people it is extremely important if you
are interested in politics to understand
why people vote the way they do and
dismissing people as deluded or stupid
or some other derogatory word is not
helping mike represents a
certain voter and well just watch his
videos he's a nice guy with an
interesting backstory and he reveals
that in various videos it can be jarring
to be told by intellectuals over and
over again that your entire worldview is
completely wrong and actually you're a
bad person you must be a bad person
because you're voting for a guy who is
worse than a guy who might be complicit
in well dead baby corpses in basements i
mean that's where this hyperbole is
getting us
so watch mike he does more commentary in
this particular video and more analysis
than normal but he is still letting
people speak for themselves he's not
unfairly representing anyone he's
letting you the viewer make up your mind
for the most part and perhaps most
importantly you're getting to understand
his opinion and the opinion of people
like him who vote trump i'll just play a
little bit of it even if joe like even
whatever scope of joe biden's corruption
is like if we could just go down that
rabbit hole endlessly and and
understand that he's getting kickbacks
from hunter biden's deals in ukraine or
wherever else right or china
it is
infinitesimal
compared to the corruption we know trump
is involved in
now if he wasn't in an echo chamber with
these two guys interviewing him they
would have said okay sam hold on step
back step back a minute what is the
corruption donald trump trump's involved
in or what are the lies or what are the
crimes that donald trump is involved in
because since the mar-a-lago raid
reporters have hit the streets to go to
these anti-trump rallies and talk to
these people with trump derangement
syndrome to ask them specifically
what crimes did donald trump commit what
lies did donald trump tell and you know
what the answers they get are
crickets
is this unprecedented to arrest a former
president for not turning into the
former president that had committed this
many provable criminal acts but what are
the provable criminal acts i guess
[Music]
provable criminal ads well
i'm just i
i'm done
hold your crickets
they they got they got they have nothing
they have nothing
all right let's see what else sam harris
has to say
it is
infinitesimal
compared to the corruption we know trump
is involved in it's like it's like it's
like a firefly to the sun right i mean
like there's just it doesn't even it
doesn't even stack up against trump
university
right trump university as a story
is worse than anything that could be in
in hunter biden's laptop in
my view right
but all right this guy clearly clearly
has not seen hunter biden's laptop i
don't know much about trump university
or was it a failed business venture
where some people lost some money i i
don't know much about it so i can't
really speak on it um
this guy has definitely not seen hunter
biden's laptop the things that are in
hunter biden's laptop uh
it really doesn't get any worse i mean i
can't even say what's in it on here i've
seen up
several a lot of things right i can't
even say what's in it on here without
having my youtube channel nuked so that
should tell you something if you haven't
seen it i don't recommend you going
looking either i don't think mike is
being overly hyperbolic here or even
necessarily hyperbolic period i don't
think he's an example of what i'm
complaining about in terms of hyperbole
in my article here today in my podcast
he's not saying sam is an existential
threat or a complete lunatic or a
dangerous liar or anything like that
now i watched the entire interview with
sam with the trigonometry guys and i do
think there has been a hyperbolic
reaction to it from some of sam's
detractors i think that is entirely
unfair
interestingly that hyperbolic reaction
to sam is not coming from people like
mike it's coming from his fellow
intellectuals they are the ones saying
he's utterly lost his mind or that he is
unhinged and so on well i don't think
that i think that yes perhaps lacking in
caution with his language might be a way
to put it but he's not dangerous or
unhinged or anything like that he has
strong opinions and by the way you watch
something like that trigonometry
interview in full and he explains
himself now whether you think the
explanations are satisfactory to you is
another matter but they satisfy him and
so he reaches the conclusions he does
how to frame and promote those
conclusions is another matter but
whatever the majority of the interview
once you get past the first 30 minutes
or so
is focused on other interesting stuff
for example from the 70 minute point
onwards or so the material about
meditation and the subjective objective
distinction it's just great i mean it's
not new but that does not make it any
less insightful the idea that meditation
can break the distinction between the
feeling you have as a subject and the
world as a set of objects means you can
be relieved if you need to be of the
stress associated with being a
self-conscious person or free of your
worries and anxieties about how you seem
to appear to others now everyone gets
this i mean everyone has social anxiety
to some extent but that's also the thing
to some extent and to very different
extents it seems some people are just
perennially unhappy or worried nervous
fearful all that negative stuff and so
for those people meditation if
understood well or indeed not just
meditation but any number of practices
from feldenkrais to alexander technique
to prayer and massage and the list is
long of things that can help people to
feel more comfortable in their bodies
more comfortable with themselves some
people will get more benefit than others
because their starting points can be so
very different there are some people who
are desperately anxious and uptight and
they need something like meditation or
medication or something like it but
can't quite get it can't quite get how
to do meditation at the other extreme
there exist people who are not so
anxious and not very uptight who
nevertheless can be excellent natural
practitioners of mindfulness or whatever
the practice might be
and then there's everyone in between
people who need it and can do it and
people who don't need it but
can't quite get a handle on how to do it
anyways which is to say some people are
missing out but it doesn't matter and
some people are missing out but they
really need to try and get it i get the
impression watching from afar for some
time that many in sam's audience are of
that kind they really need something
like meditation and rather many of them
can't quite seem to get it but they
should keep trying and something like
sam's waking up app is brilliant for
that for my money the app is worth it
just to have access to the catalogue of
the alan watts collection that's dozens
and dozens of hours of the great
philosopher alan watts lecturing and
doing guided meditations and so on it's
wonderful stuff well worth the
subscription alone lucky for me i was an
early adopter and so i still qualify for
a free account because i was a financial
supporter of sam's podcast and app
pretty much from the beginning and
kindly his reward for people like me who
showed early support is to just have
continuous access to all of his content
for free more or less and that's a nice
idea if you do like content creators out
there and they offer some benefit early
on take them up on it i'm now also a
sporadic supporter of mike versus
everyone and his youtube channel i think
it's worth it i like to keep up with
some of what the young people of a
certain political ideology are up to
these days and most especially what some
of their teachers are up to especially
in the usa when it comes to this woke
stuff there's a lot of them out there
now i can't be bothered searching for
examples myself so mike does that for us
he as i say curates the material just to
explore his channel a little and see i
don't endorse everything mike says or
perhaps insinuates but then i can't say
that about anyone either i don't endorse
everything i have ever said
okay a couple of final pieces of
hyperbole and this one's local to me our
last prime minister here in australia
his name is scott morrison he was in the
headlines recently it was revealed that
during the pandemic he did something a
little bit unusual he assigned to
himself the powers of other ministers so
he took on the powers of the minister
for health and the treasurer and some
other portfolios as well now the fact he
did this is one thing but the fact he
never told
those other ministers his colleagues is
something else and so those colleagues
have in many cases now come out against
him even though they were among his
greatest supporters at the time he was
prime minister but some of the reaction
in the media you can guess hyperbolic
people claiming he was trying to take
over like a tyrant and usurp the whole
government apparatus
i mean his own explanation buried in
interviews he's given since in press
conferences which have been very poorly
communicated as far as i'm concerned
seem to have been that during the
pandemic it was in truth a time of
urgency and novel problems problems
never encountered before and so among
other things he thought to himself well
what if my ministers become
incapacitated presumably from covert if
people literally started dropping off
because as we were told at times bodies
were going to pile up in the streets
then in that climate i can well imagine
he was signing all sorts of things and
among them why not give him
self-emergency powers that seems
reasonable and does not seem like the
action of a tyrant in response to an
emergency there is nothing in taking on
those powers that means he could not
still be removed from office usually by
his own party that's always a risk in
our system it happens over and over
again it has happened over and over
again or indeed in our system by the
person called the governor general who
actually has the authority to do that to
remove the entire government so he could
not have become a tyrant he couldn't
but the fact he never told anyone he was
taking on these other powers is a bit
strange now it may just have been an
oversight maybe it was just an
administrative thing he was doing lots
of administrative things at the time of
covert and he just overlooked it or it
may have been nefarious but if you watch
the news about this you would think it
was some kind of julius caesar moment or
emperor palpatine in the name of the
galactic senate of the republic
you're under arrest chancellor are you
threatening me master jedi
the senate will decide your fate
i am the senate not yet
i am the senate moment
but it wasn't that
okay that'll do for now i'll be live
streaming again over the coming week
podcasts about chapter seven a
conversation about justification from
david deutsch's the fabric of reality
are also available in the usual places
they're at now one of which is focused
just recently on popper's book realism
in the aim of science a part of that
book anyway that is devoted to
corroboration and that's really um for
the epistemology die-hards out there
part three of that chapter should be out
in the coming days if you'd like to
support me on patreon or some other
method the links are right there at
www.bretthall.org
until next time bye-bye